# Algorithms

As of this session, we have seen almost everything C has to offer!  It might
be hard to imagine, but with the tools we have been given, it is possible
to write any algorithm.  Yes, any algorithm you could possibly imagine can
be written with the tools we have learned.  Now it's just a matter of good
thinking and organization.  In this session we will go over some well known
data structures and algorithms.

## Linked List

We motivate our discussion with the problem: Given two very large numbers
as an input, print their sum.  We will assume the numbers are too large to
fit into any of the predefined classes of integer and therefore we will need
a new way of storing them.  There might be better ways, but as one of the
simpler solutions, we will store a number as a linked list, each node
representing one digit.  We can re-use some of our code from the previous
session.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/linkedList.c"}
```

Some questions:
* What are some flaws, or things missing in this code?
* What other functions could we add?

## Stack

We motivate our discussion with the problem: Given a string of mixed
parentheses, determine if it's balanced.  For example, `(){[]}` is balanced,
while `[(])` is not.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/stack.c"}
```

## Binary Search Tree

We motivate our discussion with a simple problem.  How can we determine if
an array of strings contains a duplicate?  For example, 

`{"cat", "dog", "cat"}` contains a duplicate, while `{"cat", "dog", "bat"}`
does not.  One simple solution would be create a double for loop over the array
and simply check if any pair of words contains the same word.  However this
is very slow for long lists.  (In fact the running time is roughly proportional
to the square of the list length)

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/binarySearchTree.c"}
```

Some questions:
* What are some flaws, or things missing in this code?
* What other functions could we add?
* What is the expected run time for the contains function?
* What happens when we feed an ordered list of strings in?
* How might we generalize this data structure to more than just strings?

We can go a little bit further with the binary search tree, and store values
along with the keys.  For example consider the problem of counting the number
of occurences of a string in an array.

```snippet
{"code": "snippets/binarySearchTreeMap.c"}
```
